Overview

Metagenomics is a recently-founded area of research that focuses on the sequencing of a community of microorganisms. The metagenome is the total sum of DNA from this community of microorganisms. Metagenomics studies the structure and function of this DNA from a group of organisms. Metagenomics is often used to study a specific community of microorganisms, whether that be in the human body or somewhere else. There are two common approaches to sequencing metagenomic data. The first one is amplicon sequencing, which amplifies a single piece of DNA, which would be the 16S gene in bacterial communities. The second method of sequencing is whole shotgun (WGS) metagenomics, which is where random samples of the microbial genome are taken without amplification and sequenced. This sequencing results in the mixture of all the DNA in the microbial community sample. 
	Understanding metagenomic sequencing is important because it builds the foundation of our project. Another important aspect of our project is NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive (SRA), which is the biggest publicly available repository of high throughput sequencing and includes metagenomic sequencing of microbial communities. This storage of raw sequencing data and alignment information allows for increased reproducibility of previously done research as well as discovering new phenomenons in our world through data analysis. This database is a part of the International Nucleotide Database Collection (INSDC), which is in collaboration with NCBI, the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), and the DNA Data Bank of Japan (BBBJ). Submitting files in the .bam format is preferred, which can store aligned or unaligned reads. From there, a user can convert the files to other formats by using the NCBI SRA Toolkit.
	SearchSRA is a bioinformatics tool that is used to mine for metagenomic sequences for specific genes or genomes of interest. It is roughly similar to BLAST as it searches for a specific sequence within the SRA database. But, this tool is important because BLAST does not work on the SRA database. The results that can come from SearchSRA can help determine what genomes or metabolisms are found in a particular environment. It can also figure out if a given environment has a specific gene, protein, genome, or metabolism, or  if a particular gene is conserved across environments. The computations to lead to these conclusions require large computing and storage capabilities, which SearchSRA provides. This is a heavily used tool with about 3,000 runs per month of WGS data and about 100TB of data To summarize, SearchSRA is a tool used to search for a particular gene or genome within metagenomic data stored within the SRA database. Dr, Putonti would like to focus on mining for virus genomes in metagenomes within the SRA database. 
